Course Notes: Kubernetes Rolling Updates

Video Learning Objectives

By the end of this module, you should be able to:

Explain what a rolling update is and how it works in Kubernetes.

List the required pre-steps and configuration strategies before applying a rolling update.

Demonstrate how to perform an image update and roll back a deployment.

Compare all-at-once versus one-at-a-time (staggered) rollout and rollback strategies.

Core Rolling Update Concepts

Definition: Automated, scheduled updates that roll out controlled application changes across pods incrementally using pod templates (e.g., Deployments).

Key Benefit: Allows seamless deployment of application updates and rollbacks without causing noticeable downtime or service interruption for end users.

Pre-Steps for Configuring Rolling Updates

To prepare an application for zero-downtime rolling updates, configure the following in the Deployment YAML:

Health Probes: Add liveness probes and readiness probes to ensure pods are fully functional before they are marked as ready to receive traffic.

Strategy Parameters:

maxSurge: Specifies the maximum number of pods that can be created above the desired replica count during an update (e.g., maxSurge: 2 on 10 pods allows up to 12 total pods, setting maxSurge: 100% doubles the pod count temporarily).

maxUnavailable: Specifies the maximum number of pods that can be unavailable during the update process (set maxUnavailable: 0 to guarantee a zero-downtime system).

minReadySeconds: Specifies the baseline duration (in seconds) to wait after a new pod is ready before moving to the next pod in the rollout phase.

Step-by-Step Rolling Update & Rollback Workflow

Phase 1: Build & Publish Image

Dockerize the updated application code (e.g., changing "Hello World" to "Hello World v2").

Build, tag, and push the new container image to a registry (e.g., Docker Hub tag: hello-kubernetes:2.0).

Phase 2: Apply Image Update

Update the deployment image using the kubectl set image command.

Command: kubectl set image deployment/ =

Phase 3: Verify Rollout

Check the update progress and confirm successful deployment using the rollout status command.

Command: kubectl rollout status deployment/

Phase 4: Perform Rollback

If errors occur or a revert is needed, undo the rollout to restore the previous state.

Command: kubectl rollout undo deployment/

Verify that updated pods are terminated and replaced by original pods using kubectl get pods.

Deployment Strategies Compared

All-at-Once Strategy

Rollout: All version 1 pods are marked for deletion and removed simultaneously as version 2 pods are created. User access is temporarily blocked during the transition until version 2 pods become active.

Rollback: All version 2 pods are removed simultaneously, blocking user access until original version 1 pods are recreated and active.

One-at-a-Time (Staggered) Strategy

Rollout: Updates are staggered incrementally. A single version 2 pod is created, replacing one version 1 pod at a time until the rollout completes. User access remains completely uninterrupted.

Rollback: Reverts changes incrementally one pod at a time, ensuring continuous availability while returning to the previous version.

Summary Checklist

Rolling updates deploy changes automatically and controllably across cluster pods.

Readiness and liveness probes paired with maxSurge and maxUnavailable settings prevent application downtime.

Rollbacks are executed using the kubectl rollout undo command.

Staggered (one-at-a-time) updates preserve uninterrupted user traffic compared to all-at-once replacements.