Course Notes: Using Kubectl
Video Learning Objectives
By the end of this module, you should be able to:

Define kubectl and explain its fundamental command structure.

List the three kubectl command types along with their features, advantages, and drawbacks.

List commonly used kubectl commands and describe specific operational examples.

What is Kubectl?
Definition: kubectl stands for "kube command tool line" and serves as the official Command Line Interface (CLI) for Kubernetes.

Core Functions: Used to deploy applications, inspect and manage cluster resources, view logs, and handle running cluster workloads.

Kubectl Command Structure
Every kubectl command follows a strict order that must be maintained:

Plaintext
kubectl [command] [type] [name] [flags]
command: Specifies the operation to perform (e.g., create, get, apply, delete).

type: Specifies the Kubernetes resource type (e.g., pod, deployment, replicaset, service).

name: Specifies the specific name of the resource (if applicable).

flags: Special options or modifiers used to override default settings (e.g., -f, -o wide, --all-namespaces).

The Three Kubectl Command Types
1. Imperative Commands
How it Works: Users run commands directly in the CLI, passing required operations, options, and parameters as arguments/flags without using configuration files (e.g., kubectl run nginx --image=nginx).

Advantages: Very easy to learn, quick to execute, and ideal for fast experimentation in development/test environments.

Disadvantages: Lacks an audit trail for tracking changes, lacks flexibility due to limited CLI options, does not support templates, and cannot integrate with code review processes.

Team Impact: If one developer deploys an app imperatively, another developer cannot replicate it without asking for the exact CLI string because no shared file exists.

2. Imperative Object Configuration
How it Works: The user writes full resource definitions in YAML or JSON files and specifies both the operation and the filename in the command (e.g., kubectl create -f nginx.yaml or kubectl delete -f nginx.yaml).

Advantages: Templates can be stored in source control (Git), integrate with change review processes, provide audit trails, and yield identical deployment results across environments.

Disadvantages: Requires deep knowledge of object schemas and manual creation of complex YAML/JSON files.

Team Impact: If a developer updates a live object without merging the change back into the configuration file, subsequent deployments using the original file will overwrite those live updates.

3. Declarative Object Configuration
How it Works: The user defines the desired final state in YAML/JSON configuration files (or directories of files) and runs kubectl apply (e.g., kubectl apply -f ./configs/). The system automatically compares the live cluster state against the files, determines the required operations, and transitions the cluster to the desired state.

Advantages: Operations are automated by Kubernetes rather than specified by the user; works seamlessly on entire directories; provides a single source of truth; updates remain consistent even if team members miss intermediate changes.

Best Practice: This is the ideal method for production systems.

Commonly Used Kubectl Commands & Examples
kubectl get: Accesses and lists information about resources.

List services in the current namespace: kubectl get services

List pods in all namespaces: kubectl get pods --all-namespaces

List details for a specific deployment: kubectl get deployment my-dep

kubectl apply: Creates or updates resources defined in .yaml, .yml, or .json files or URLs.

Apply configuration from a file: kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml

Apply configuration from a directory: kubectl apply -f ./my-configs/

kubectl delete: Removes resources or files from the cluster.

Delete a resource using its configuration file: kubectl delete -f nginx.yaml

kubectl scale: Adjusts the replica count for a running workload.

Scale a ReplicaSet named foo to 3 replicas: kubectl scale rs/foo --replicas=3

Scale using a configuration file: kubectl scale -f resourceinfo.yaml --replicas=3

kubectl autoscale: Applies horizontal autoscaling rules to selected workloads based on target metrics.

Practical Deployment Example Walkthrough
Deploying Applications Declaratively:
Run kubectl apply -f deployment.yaml to instantiate an NGINX deployment with 3 desired replicas.

Verifying Deployment Status:
Run kubectl get deployment my-dep to view replica metrics.

Expected Output Parameters:
The output confirms the creation of replicas with key metrics showing Ready, Up-to-date, and Available