Opening Files in Python
The open Function: Used to create a file object and obtain data from a .txt file.

Arguments for open:

File Path: Made up of the file name and the file directory (e.g., Example1.txt).

Mode: Tells Python what you want to do with the file.

r = Reading

w = Writing

a = Appending

File Object Data Attributes:

.name: Returns a string that contains the name of the file.

.mode: Tells you what mode the object is in (e.g., returns r representing read).

Closing Files and Best Practices
The .close Method: You should always close the file object using this method when you are done.

The with Statement (Best Practice):

Because manually closing files can get tedious, it is better practice to open files using a with statement.

It automatically closes the file after running all the operations within its indented block.

Rules of the with statement:

You cannot read from the file outside the indent.

You can verify if the file is closed outside the indent.

You can print the file content outside the indent (as long as you saved it to a variable inside the indent).

Reading Data from a File
.read Method: Stores the values of the file as a single string (e.g., saving it to a variable like file_stuff).

Note: If you examine the raw string, you will see \n, which tells Python to start a new line.

.readlines Method: Outputs every line as an element in a list. The first line of the file corresponds to the first element in the list, the second line to the second element, and so on.

.readline Method: Reads individual lines sequentially.

Calling it the first time saves and prints the first line.

Calling it a second time saves and prints the second line.

Loops: You can use a loop to print out each line of the file individually.

Reading Specific Character Counts
You can specify the exact number of characters you want to read from a string by passing an argument to the method (the transcript notes this as passing an argument to readlines).

Example: If you use 4 as an argument, it prints out the first four characters in the file.

Each time you call the method, it progresses further through the text.

Example sequence: Calling it with 16 prints the first 16 characters and the new line. Calling it a second time with 5 prints the next five characters. Calling it a final time with 9 prints the last nine characters.