JavaScript DOM Objects
Learning Objectives

List related node types.

Show how to access document elements.

Explain object naming.

Node Types (W3C DOM Level 2)
The W3C DOM Level 2 defines 12 different types of nodes, seven of which are directly applicable to HTML documents. Each node type is a named constant that is also represented by an integer value.

ELEMENT_NODE (Integer: 1)

The node name is the name of the element or tag (e.g., if looking at a DIV element, the node name is "DIV").

ATTRIBUTE_NODE (Integer: 2)

Represents an attribute (e.g., id="div123").

The attribute name (e.g., "id") is the node name, and the attribute value (e.g., "div123") is the node value (a name-value pair).

TEXT_NODE (Integer: 3)

Represents text strings (e.g., text following a paragraph element).

The node name is #text (hash-sign-text), and the node value is the actual text string itself.

COMMENT_NODE (Integer: 8)

Represents comments within the document.

Note: You can see these properties and corresponding data types when you view a DOM tree for an HTML page using a browser’s developer tools, such as Chrome’s DevTools.

Accessing Document Elements
When an HTML document is loaded, the browser automatically creates arrays for forms, images, anchors, links, applets, and embeds.

Array Indexing:

All objects of each type are placed into these arrays.

Arrays are indexed as they occur in the source document.

The first index of each array starts at zero (0).

Nested Arrays: Each array type (like forms[]) contains an array of elements[] representing the specific fields or buttons that occur within that form.

Accessing by Index: You can reference elements by their relative position.

Example: document.forms[0].elements[0]

Accessing by Name (Dot Notation): You can reference the exact same field using named elements.

Example: document.forms["form1"].elements["field1"]

Shortened Example: document.form1.field1

Prefix Rules: Since only one document can be contained in a window, you can leave out the window prefix. However, you cannot omit the document prefix from the referenced object.

Object Naming and the ID Attribute
The id attribute identifies a specific element in a document and is used by scripts to refer to that element.

Conventions for assigning an ID:

The ID must be a unique name within the document.

The name must be in quotation marks when assigned to the id attribute.

The name must not start with a numeric digit.

Using IDs in JavaScript:

The function used to return a node object matching the ID value is document.getElementById(id_name), passing the name of the ID as a parameter argument.

Best Practice: It is suggested to use the exact same value for both the id and the name attribute when both are being used on an element.