Lecture Notes: Deploying and Running Applications in IBM Cloud Code Engine

Learning Objectives

After completing this lecture, you will be able to:

Explain the two primary modes of deploying a container image-based application.

Describe how to deploy an application using the IBM Cloud Console.

Describe how to deploy, manage, and test an application using the IBM Cloud CLI.

Two Modes of Application Deployment

IBM Cloud Code Engine supports two main approaches for deploying containerized applications. The core execution model is identical; the primary difference lies in who builds and pushes the container image.

Mode 1: Deploying from a Pre-built Container Image

Process: The developer manually builds the container image and pushes it to a public or private container registry (e.g., IBM Cloud Container Registry or Docker Hub).

Execution: Code Engine pulls the image using a unique image name (and optional registry credentials) and deploys it automatically.

Mode 2: Source-to-Cloud Deployment (Source Code Build)

Process: The developer provides raw source code along with a Dockerfile or a Cloud Native Buildpack.

Execution: Code Engine automatically builds the container image from the source repository, pushes it to a registry, and deploys the application.

Deploying via IBM Cloud Console (GUI)

The IBM Cloud Console offers an intuitive web portal for creating, configuring, and monitoring applications with minimal configuration effort.

Main Deployment Steps

Name Configuration: Specify a unique name for the application.

Deployment Source Selection: Choose between deploying from a Container image or directly from Source code (defaults to Container image).

Image Reference & Credentials: Provide the container image URI and configure registry access credentials if pulling from a private repository.

Advanced Settings (Optional): Configure environment variables, runtime port mappings, resource limits (CPU/memory), and scaling parameters.

Automatic Deployment & Testing: Code Engine deploys the application once created. Upon successful setup, the system generates a public endpoint URL accessible via the "Test application" action.

Deploying via IBM Cloud CLI

For precise control, scripting, and CI/CD automation, applications can be managed using the IBM Cloud Command Line Interface (CLI).

Creating and Deploying an Application

Command: ibmcloud ce app create

Primary Arguments:

--name: Name of the application.

--image: Image reference path in the container registry.

--registry-secret: Access secret name (required if using a private registry).

Example Creation Command:
ibmcloud ce app create --name helloworldapp --image us.icr.io/namespace/helloworld:v1 --registry-secret myregistry

Retrieving Application Details and Endpoint URL

Command: ibmcloud ce app get

Primary Arguments:

--name: Name of the application to query.

--output: Output format (e.g., url to return the direct public HTTP/HTTPS endpoint).

Example Retrieval Command:
ibmcloud ce app get --name helloworldapp --output url

Lecture Summary

Applications can be deployed from existing container images or compiled directly from source code using buildpacks or Dockerfiles.

The IBM Cloud Console provides a graphical interface for rapid application deployment and endpoint testing.

The IBM Cloud CLI offers command-line tools (ibmcloud ce app create and ibmcloud ce app get) to automate application creation and extract operational URLs