Lecture Notes: Django Authentication and Authorization System
1. Fundamentals of Authentication vs. Authorization
Authentication (Identity Validation):

The process of verifying the identity of a user using credentials such as username and password, one-time passcodes (SMS/email), Single Sign-On (SSO), or biometrics (fingerprints/face recognition).

In Django, authentication is managed primarily via the built-in User model and helper functions from django.contrib.auth.

Authorization (Access Control):

The process of determining a verified user's access permissions for specific system resources or operations.

System administrators define roles or groups with dedicated permissions (e.g., viewing, editing, or deleting a course) and assign users accordingly.

2. The User Model & Authentication Workflow
A. User Login Process
Login Form: A web template collects user credentials via an HTML form with username and password input fields and submits a POST request to a login view.

authenticate(request, username, password):

Checks the provided credentials against database records.

Return Value: Returns a valid User instance if credentials match; returns None if invalid.

login(request, user):

Attaches the authenticated user to the current web session and updates the session metadata.

Redirects the user to the destination view (e.g., the application index page).

B. User Registration Process
A registration form sends new credential inputs (username, password, email) via a POST request to a registration view.

The registration view extracts POST data and creates a new user using the model manager's create_user() method:

Python
from django.contrib.auth.models import User

user = User.objects.create_user(username=username, password=password)
The user can then be automatically logged in via login(request, user) and redirected.

C. User Logout Process
Calling logout(request) terminates the current user session, clears session data, and logs the user out.

3. Web Sessions and Cookies
Stateful Sessions: Web sessions store stateful data across multiple HTTP requests so users remain logged in without re-authenticating on every page interaction.

Session Mechanics:

Server Side: Django creates a unique session ID, queries the user's information, and links it to that session ID.

Browser Side: The browser stores the session ID in a COOKIE.

Accessing Session Metadata in Django:

request.COOKIES: Retrieves client-side cookies, including the session ID.

request.session: A dictionary-like object storing session data (e.g., user_id).

Unauthenticated State: If a user is not logged in, the session ID returns None and request.session is empty.

4. Django Authorization: Users, Permissions, and Groups
Authorization in Django is structured around three core interconnected models: User, Permission, and Group.

A. The Permission Model
Has a Many-to-Many relationship with the User model.

Defines object types and action privileges. By default, Django automatically creates four basic permissions for every registered model:

View (e.g., Can view course)

Add (e.g., Can add course)

Change (e.g., Can change course)

Delete (e.g., Can delete course)

B. The Group Model
Provides a batch mechanism to manage permissions for multiple users sharing the same role.

Permissions assigned to a Group automatically apply to all users belonging to that group.

Examples:

Instructors Group: Assigned Add, Change, Delete, and View permissions for course content.

Learners Group: Assigned only View permissions for course content.

C. Management Interfaces
Django Admin Site: Offers a built-in graphical user interface to create groups, configure model permissions, and assign users to groups with zero custom code.

Programmatic APIs: Allows developers to assign permissions or group memberships dynamically via code.