Welcome to "Creating REST APIs." By the end of this lecture, you will be able to:

Create a RESTful API in Python.

Use Flask to host your REST API.

Python & Its Ecosystem
Python is a programming language that lets you work more quickly and integrate your systems more effectively. It is used across many application domains:

Web Development: Supported by web frameworks like Flask.

Scientific & Numeric Computing: Supported by libraries like SciPy for mathematics, science, and engineering.

Artificial Intelligence & Machine Learning: Widely popular choice among the AI/ML community.

Overview of Flask
Flask is classified as a micro web framework because it does not require specific tools or libraries.

Built with simplicity and scalability in mind.

Known for being lightweight compared to other frameworks.

Non-opinionated about database or template engine selection, making it an excellent choice for building RESTful APIs.

Environment Prerequisites & Installation
To follow along with this module, you need:

Python 3

pip (the Python package manager)

Once you verify that Python and pip are installed, install Flask using pip:
pip install flask

Step-by-Step Implementation

1. Basic "Hello World" Application

Create a Python file named hello.py.

Run the Flask server to host the application file.

Open the application in your browser by navigating to [http://127.0.0.1:5000](http://127.0.0.1:5000). You will see the response "Hello World".

2. Building a Products Microservice (products.py)

Create a new Python file named products.py to provide endpoints for a products microservice.

Imports & Initial State: Define the necessary imports and establish a default list of products.

Note on Persistence: Because no external database is used to persist products, restarting the API resets the data back to the default product list each time.

Retrieve Products Endpoint (GET):

Define a GET method to retrieve all products.

This method implicitly returns an HTTP status code of 200 (which means OK in HTTP).

Lecture Summary

Flask is a lightweight, non-opinionated micro web framework for hosting Python web applications and services.

You can quickly create and structure a RESTful API microservice using Python.

You can host your RESTful API locally using the built-in Flask development server.