The Serverless Framework
Learning Objectives
After completing this lecture, you will be able to:

Describe what the Serverless Framework is.

Explain how to create a basic Serverless function.

Explain how to test a Serverless function.

1. Introduction to the Serverless Framework
The Serverless Framework is a free, open-source web framework written in Node.js.

It provides a command-line interface (CLI) that offers structure, automation, and best practices out-of-the-box. This structure enables developers to build event-driven, serverless architectures without manually configuring cloud infrastructure.

Provider Support
Originally designed to safely and quickly provision Amazon Web Services (AWS) Lambda functions, events, and infrastructure resources.

Also supports other major cloud providers, including Microsoft Azure, Google Cloud Platform (GCP), and Apache OpenWhisk.

2. Core Architecture Concepts
The framework organizes applications using four core building blocks:

Functions
Code deployed in the cloud written to perform a single task.

Functions act as independent units of execution and deployment (similar to microservices).

Examples: Saving a user to a database, or running a scheduled background task.

Events
Triggers that execute functions.

Events originate from cloud resources.

Examples: An HTTP GET/POST request sent to an API Gateway URL, or a file upload event in an Amazon S3 bucket.

Resources
Infrastructure components utilized by functions.

Managed services provided by cloud infrastructure.

Examples: A cloud database service (e.g., DynamoDB) or an S3 storage bucket.

Services
The framework’s primary unit of organization (conceptually similar to a project file).

An application can consist of a single service or multiple services.

3. Service Configuration (serverless.yml)
A service is defined and managed using a single configuration file named serverless.yml.

Central Control: The serverless.yml file configures all functions, events, and resources within the service.

Dedicated Sections: Contains explicit blocks for specifying details about functions, triggers (events), and infrastructure components (resources).

Unified Deployment: Executing a deployment command via the Serverless Framework CLI packages and deploys everything declared inside serverless.yml simultaneously.

4. Creating, Deploying, and Testing a Function (AWS Demo Workflow)
Step 1: Installation & Setup
Ensure AWS credentials are set up on your machine.

Install the Serverless Framework CLI globally via Node Package Manager (npm):

Bash
npm install -g serverless
Step 2: Service Creation
Create a new AWS HTTP API project (using Python as the runtime):

Bash
serverless
Running the serverless command launches an interactive wizard that generates the required project structure, including handler.py and serverless.yml.

Step 3: Function Deployment
Deploy the service and its resources to AWS:

Bash
serverless deploy
Upon completion, the CLI provides a public HTTP endpoint URL.

Step 4: Testing & Updating
Initial Test: Open the returned API endpoint URL in a web browser to view the initial execution result.

Code Update: Modify the function handler code (e.g., in Python) to return "Hello World" upon request.

Re-deployment & Re-testing: Re-run serverless deploy and refresh the endpoint URL in your browser to verify the updated output.

Lecture Summary
The Serverless Framework is an open-source, Node.js-based CLI tool used to structure, automate, and deploy serverless architectures across AWS, Azure, GCP, and OpenWhisk.

Functions are independent units of execution triggered by events (such as HTTP requests or S3 uploads).

All service components—functions, events, and resources—are configured inside a central serverless.yml file and deployed together.