Node.js Core Concepts & Architecture
1. The Full-Stack Application
A full-stack application is divided into two primary environments:

The Client Side: The user-facing components, such as websites and mobile applications.

The Server Side: Processes client requests and sends back responses. In modern architecture, the web server, application server, and database are typically hosted in the cloud.

2. Node.js: Open Source & Cross-Platform
JavaScript was initially chosen for client-side HTML validation due to its versatility and cross-platform compatibility. It was later adapted for the server, creating Node.js.

Runtime Environment: Node.js functions as a runtime and requires no special licenses.

Ecosystem: Its open-source nature has led to a massive ecosystem of packages and libraries.

Cross-Platform: Node.js code runs seamlessly across Linux, Windows, and macOS.

3. The V8 Engine
All code must be converted into a machine-readable form to execute.

Node.js uses the Google V8 engine to execute JavaScript on the server side.

V8 is a high-performance, open-source engine originally developed for Google Chrome and is also used by modern browsers like Microsoft Edge.

4. Node.js Execution Model
Server processes are generally either single-threaded (processing one command at a time) or multi-threaded (processing multiple simultaneously). Node.js is uniquely designed:

Single-Threaded but Efficient: Node.js operates on a single thread but remains highly efficient.

Asynchronous & Non-Blocking: The program does not wait for a process to finish before moving on.

Event-Driven: When Node.js performs an I/O operation (like reading from a network, database, or file system), it doesn't block the thread. Instead, an event is triggered, and operations resume only when the response is received.

Result: This allows the server to remain responsive and handle multiple tasks concurrently, mimicking the benefits of a multi-threaded environment.

5. JSON Payloads
Data transmitted between the client and server is called the payload, which is formatted as JSON (JavaScript Object Notation) using key-value pairs.

Client Request Payload:
When the client sends data, it sends a JSON object. The server can then extract this data (e.g., using request.name).

JSON
{ 
  "name": "John", 
  "age": "24", 
  "email": "johnparker@gmail.com"
}
Server Response Payload:
The server also sends its response back to the client as JSON.

JSON
{ 
  "status": "ok", 
  "message": "Successfully added"
}
6. The Express Framework
While Node.js has built-in packages to create a server, the Express framework simplifies the process of creating APIs and endpoints.

API Endpoint: A specific point of entry for a request sent from the client to the server.